What's New 8.5 (#2286)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/whats-new.asciidoc

Here are the highlights of what's new and improved in {minor-version}.

Other versions:

> {observability-guide-all}/8.4/whats-new.html[8.3] |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{observability-guide-all}/8.4/whats-new.html[8.4] |
```

Author: Ha, you're too good - I spotted that and fixed it locally but didn't think anyone would notice before I updated!

(I probably should have taken obs-docs off review until PMs had finished reviewing...)

{observability-guide-all}/8.3/whats-new.html[8.3] |
{observability-guide-all}/8.2/whats-new.html[8.2] |
{observability-guide-all}/8.1/whats-new.html[8.1] |
{observability-guide-all}/8.0/whats-new.html[8.0] |
{observability-guide-all}/7.17/whats-new.html[7.17] |

// tag::whats-new[]

[discrete]

> == Perform annotations-based monitoring of Kubernetes workloads with standalone Elastic Agent

Author: Thanks, hadn't got to that stage yet but fixing now!

If you're using Elastic Agent in standalone mode, you can now perform annotation
or _hints-based_ monitoring of Kubernetes workloads. This feature (already
 available for Beats users) is now available as a technical preview in 8.5 for
Elastic Agent running in standalone mode.

This feature enables Elastic operators to provide Kubernetes cluster users with
a self-service monitoring configuration experience that is GitOps friendly.
You can enable this feature in the Elastic Agent YAML file by uncommenting
the init container as shown:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hints-autodiscovery-yaml.png[Uncomment to enable hints-based monitoring]

> You can download Elastic Agent templates for https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/tree/main/deploy/kubernetes/elastic-agent-standalone/templates.d[~60 supported packages]

Author: Good question. I'd guess main is probably more useful in this context (and users can switch if needed) but what do you think @mlunadia ? Do these templates change much per version?

> You can download Elastic Agent templates for https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/tree/main/deploy/kubernetes/elastic-agent-standalone/templates.d[~60 supported packages]

Author: Will link to 8.5 in this case...

, and add or edit your own templates within `/etc/elastic-agent/inputs.d`.

Cluster users responsible for defining a pod manifest can add annotations that
indicate that the pod contains a specific package they would like to monitor.
Even if cluster users do not have access to the namespace where Elastic Agent is
deployed, they are able to choose and configure monitoring for a specific pod.
The following example configuration will enable Elastic Agent to monitor this
pod using the configuration details for redis without further user action being
required.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/hints-config-example.png[Example annotations configuration for redis]

For more info, https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/master/elastic-agent-kubernetes-autodiscovery.html#_hints_annotations_based_autodiscover[read the docs].

[discrete]
== New Istio integration added

With a new Istio integration available in beta for version 8.5, you can collect

> logs from the Istio service mesh with Elastic Agent.

Reviewer 2: I normally don't mark this because it's such a pervasive problem, but the phrase "with Elastic Agent" here modifies "mesh" grammatically. I would say "by using" instead.

The Istio service mesh extends Kubernetes to establish a programmable
application-aware network using the powerful Envoy service proxy. Working with
both Kubernetes and traditional workloads, Istio brings universal traffic
management, telemetry, and security, to complex deployments. {integration-docs}/istio[Read the docs] for

> more information, and look out for support for metrics coming in future releases.

Reviewer 2: Can you rephrase this? It parses awkwardly.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/istio-integration.png[Add the Istio integration to collect logs from the Istio service mesh]

[discrete]

> == View contextual Kubernetes info from APM Service Overview

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== View contextual Kubernetes info in the APM Service Overview
```
"from" makers it sound like the info is coming from the overview, not being viewed through it. I'm not sure you even need "in the APM Service Overview" here

You can now view Kubernetes-related metadata in the context of a service. From

> the **Service Overview** page, click on the Kubernetes icon to the right of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the **Service Overview** page, click the Kubernetes icon next to the
```

service name to open a popup that contains Kubernetes details such as container
images, deployments, namespaces, and replicasets.

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/apm-overview-kubernetes-context.png[View Kubernetes info from APM Service Overview]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image::images/apm-overview-kubernetes-context.png[View Kubernetes info in APM Service Overview]
```

> You can also view additional information from the **Instance detail** view at the bottom of the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also view additional information in the **Instance detail** view at the bottom of the page.
```

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/apm-services-instance-kubernetes.png[View Kubernetes info from APM Service Overview]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image::images/apm-services-instance-kubernetes.png[View Kubernetes info in APM Service Overview]
```

[discrete]
== APM Storage Explorer available as beta

With Elastic Observability 8.5, APM Storage Explorer is now available as a beta feature.
The storage explorer enables you to view the total and relative storage footprint
of APM documents for each instrumented service. This provides visibility into the
storage impact of configuration changes such as sampling rates, and will help you
to improve storage requirement forecasts.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/apm-storage-explorer.png[View storage footprint with APM Storage Explorer]

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/apm-storage-explorer-details.png[View storage details for services]

[discrete]
== Auto-instrument APM .NET Agent profiler

> You can now dynamically instrument existing .NET Framework, .NET Core, and .NET
> applications during their startup and gain complete visibility in a matter of minutes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now dynamically instrument existing .NET Framework, .NET Core, and .NET
applications during startup and gain complete visibility in a matter of minutes.
```

Author: I did originally edit that out but then wasn't sure if there was a difference between startup of applications and startup of _something else_ / elastic so was waiting for some PM confirmation. Will take it out again unless I hear something different.

SREs and DevOps engineers are now able to instrument
existing .NET applications in their environments, whether running in containers,
IIS, or as Windows or Linux services, without needing to recompile any of the
binaries.

In addition, the latest version of .NET agent extends distributed tracing support
by providing auto-instrumentation for new libraries including Kafka, RabbitMQ,
MySql, Oracle and PostgreSQL.

> For more info, https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/dotnet/current/setup-auto-instrumentation.html[read the docs].

Reviewer 2: You need to use an attribute to resolve this path.
